---
toc: true
comments: true
author: Wale
image: /images/2020-06-13-lpiair-wk21/oneshotSegmentation.gif
categories: [2020]
permalink: /papers/:year/:month/:day/:title
---

# Prrr...

Tuesday.

I'm sitting here on a workday, at 3am, considering a lot of things.

First of all, I am wondering how I managed to make it to 3am while wide awake. I'd made a commitment to be asleep by no later than midnigt today. There are some sleepy battles that black coffee just wont fight these days.

My eyes wondered to my phone's screen and I notice the receipt for my purchse of this domain name. I then remember how long it took me to set this platform up; the sentiment behinf it all bacj then... I inevitably succumb to nostaligia. I miss writing. I miss sharing what I learn and chalenging myself to find out even more just because of the thril and rush this brings me. The satisfying feeling of transfering information and creating understanding.

You see, I have been meaning to write. I have spent what must be countless hours ruminating on what to talk about in 2020, but the trut is this has been quite a year and it has left it's historical imprint upon us all.

2020.

What a year. (Probably a story for another day?)

I am starting a new writing style experiment that I hope will lead me to write more.
I will write out all my drafts in the public eye of the internet and give myself an ultimatum to get it done.

I am too sleep deprived to work out the details right now, but this is my initial post for said experiment.

TBC....
